CS350 L06 | September 24, 2019

## DTSS

The ==Dartmouth Time Sharing System== was the first successful large scale time sharing system! Operated between 1964 and 1999. They abstracted timesharing from hardware, using preemption and actually was the first IDE. By 1968, it was used by 80% of Dartmoth students across all departments. 

# Semaphores

A ==semaphore== is a synchorinzation primitive that can be used to enforce mutual exclusion requirements. It can also be used to solve other kinds of snchronization problems. It’s an object that has an <u>integer</u> value, and that supports two operations:

- **<u>P:</u>** if the semaphore value is greater than 0, decrement the value. Otherwise, wait until the value is greater than 0 and then decrement it.
- **<u>V:</u>** increment the value of the semaphore

By definition, the `P` (acquire) and `V` (release) operations of a semaphore are ==atomic==.

> Recall, atomicity means

The implementation of semaphores is almost identical to those of locks! Semaphores though, don’t have owners, and can start with 0 resources with calls to `V` used to increment the count. It just keeps track of how many resources are available right now.

## Types

| Type               | Behaviour                                                    |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Binary Semaphore   | Has a single resource. Behaves like a lock, but does not keep track of ownership |
| Counting Semaphore | Has an arbitrary number of resources                         |
| Barrier Semaphore  | Used to force one thread to wait for others to complete. The initial count is typically 0 |

> `V` does not have to follow `P`. A semaphore can start with 0 resources, this forces a thread to wait until resources are produced before continuing.

Regardless of the usage, the implementation of all three semaphore types is the same. 

## Producer/Consumer Problem

We could use a binary semaphore to fix this, or use a lock on the buffer.

# Condition Variables

```


wait
	simultaneously release lock and sleep
	reacquire the lock
```

signal uses wake one, broadcast wakes all