CS350 L08 | October 1st

## Midterm Information

October 30th, to study go to the course website and select “Exam Information”. You can find sample exams with solutions. Anything F2016 and up is most likely good information. 

# Deadlocks

When two threads get locked on each other’s wait channel. Happens where there are multiple resources, and one thread tries to acquire them in increasing order and another tries to acquire them in some other order. Some strategies to avoid this are:

1. No Hold & Wait: Cannot be waiting, whether asleep or spinning, while holding resources.
2. Try Acquire: Try to acquire everything you need, if cannot be done then release what you have so far and return false.
3. Resource Ordering: Assign a number to each resource and ensure that the programmer makes sure that the resources are being acquired in increasing order. 

# Processes

A ==process== is an environment in which an application program runs. It’s the ***whole execution environment*** created by the OS for the program to run in. It includes virtualized ==resources== that its program can use. This includes one (or more) threads, virtual memory, and other resources such as file and socket descriptors. Each program’s process ==isolates== it from other programs in other processes. 

## Process Management Calls

|                      | Linux                                        | OS/161          |
| :------------------: | -------------------------------------------- | --------------- |
|       Creation       | `fork`, `execv`                              | `fork`, `execv` |
|     Destruction      | `_exit`, `kill`                              | `_exit`         |
|   Synchronization    | `wait`, `waitpid`, `pause`, ...              | `waitpid`       |
| Attribute Management | `getpid`, `getuid`, `nice`, `getrusage`, ... | `getpid`        |

Note that the process management calls are <u>**NOT**</u> implemented yet in OS/161. We’re going to have to implement these.

### `fork`

Creates a new process (the child) that is an identical clone to the calling process (the parent). After this fork, the virtual memories of parent and child are identical at the time of the fork, but may diverge afterwards. `fork` is called by the parent, but it returns in *both* the parent and the child. The PID of the child is 0; its not a valid PID, it’s just used to differentiate this thread from the parent thread. 

### `_exit`

Terminates the process that calls it. The process can supply an exit code when it exits, and the kernel records the exit status code in case other process asks for it (like `waitpid`). If this process has a parent and the parent is alive, the process can leave behind a message to the parent to let them know how it died. 

If a parent process dies, the child remains alive and become orphaned. In our OS, a parent cannot kill its child.

### `waitpid`

Let’s a process wait for another to terminate, and retrieves its exit status code. `_exit` and `waitpid` work together. 

### `execv`

Changes the program that a process is running. It does not create a new process. It changes the program that an existing process is running. The process structure remains the same, and it has the same PID. But the address space has now changed. It gets new virtual memory, initialized with the code and data of the new program to run. After this call, the new program will start executing. It can pass arguments to the new program too, if required. We use a null terminated array to indicate to `execv` the number of arguments that we are passing. 

You can change the program that you’re running, but you cannot change the parent-child relationship between threads. 

It’s possible for `execv` to fail if you cannot find the new program, or if there is not enough memory to run the new program. Test for these error cases and return the appropriate error codes. 





```
// Stuff we'll need for A2A and A2B
pid_t PID;
int exitCode;
struct proc* parent;
struct cv* p_cv;
struct array * children;
struct lock * pLock;
```



